Sitting in the public garden.
Does that look like a red light is running to you?
My glasses, yes.
Sitting in the public of Dr. Patrick McCabe on a gorgeous spring day.
And tell me, tell me about this book.
Tell me about it.
Yeah, tell me what it is and how it follows the butcher boy and how you've managed to achieve so much extraordinary success at such a tender young age.
How's that?
Well, I can't answer that last bit because that's up to the public.
You'll have to ask them because I only write the books and wait for what happens after that.
As far as the dead school goes, one of the reviewers there recently described it as a mesmerizing tango of psychological ruin narrated by a demented mother goose, which has to be wild if nothing else.
But basically what I always start with is music.
I started with two songs in this book.
One was called Makushla.
Mm-hmm.
means my beloved it's a very strange and almost sinister song about mortality and death the other one is uh curiously you um you know chirpy chirpy cheap cheap was the other one which also has a kind of a sinister aspect to it because totally irrelevant to this book in one way when interment was introduced in northern ireland when when interment which means interment without trial was introduced in northern ireland in belfast the kids used to sing
That's fine, you just go ahead, I'll just check.
They used to sing this song, Chirpy Chirpy Cheep Cheep, the lyrics of which go, Where's your mama gone, little baby gone?
Where's your daddy gone, little baby gone?
Ooh-ee, chirpy chirpy Cheep Cheep.
So you come down in the morning and daddy's not there, and you're still singing this hopperty skipperty, happy little ditty, a lyric.
And it seemed to me that it's juxtaposing the kind of pantomime burlesque of mortality.
Mm-hmm.
with the seemingly ordinariness of people's humdrum lives.
And I wanted to pick two outwardly unremarkable characters, you know, in the sense that... Starting with the music, Bill.
Oh, sorry, get back to the music, yeah.
And that was the kind of feeling.
That's where the feeling starts.
It doesn't start with the characters or the story?
Well, the mood first.
The mood.
The mood first.
And this is how you operate.
Well, I don't sort of consciously sit down and listen to music in the hope that it'll ignite something.
It's just over a period of time, these songs would have been in my mind.
I don't know quite what they mean until various strands come together.
You might have an image as a writer yourself, I'm sure.
You operate on some level like that.
And over a period of time, things begin to fuse and germinate, and I think it takes on a life of its own then, I think.
All right, so then go on.
Then you thought about some characters now.
Yeah, outwardly unremarkable characters.
I wanted to write about very ordinary kind of guys.
Probably almost weak.
Well, one of them would appear weak outside, perhaps.
And to explore their inner lives in great depth, the psychological landscape, as it were.
Also, the subtext to it is the collision of two Irlands, in one sense.
Shall we say...
the post-Civil War Ireland that was perhaps in a state of stasis or a sort of inertia, but also perhaps could be Ireland had a rhythm and order of its own, which was important to many people, maybe.
And then the Ireland, which I perhaps know better myself, which would be the Ireland of John F. Kennedy, you know, the post-50s kind of kaleidoscopic Ireland, where the rising tide of the economy were said to lift all boats.
And...
The resulting fallout of that, some of it good, some of it bad, and the misunderstandings of both eras.
But are you fundamentally a storyteller?
Yeah.
So this stuff is important.
That's what you're talking about.
But we still have to have a story.
Well, without the story, it's nothing.
Fundamentally, it's the caveman around the fire, you know, gathering the kids around, the middle I tell you.
And we're here to be awed and enchanted.
That's the one.
And engaged and all that stuff.
Yeah, that's the start of it.
So then...
Is there some anxiety in that choosing to write about, as you say, two unremarkable characters that people... I mean, there is a risk involved here.
Absolutely, a very big risk, and I took it consciously.
Because success disturbs me.
There are things about success that I don't like, particularly because for 20 years I've been writing.
You know, you said a tender age, but I mean, I've been writing since I was 19, and I didn't have any success.
I was going to say publishing for how long, however?
Publishing maybe since I was 23.
Well, you know, not publishing that much.
I mean, publishing a small novel, a couple of stories, stuff like that, and writing radio plays.
But I wouldn't consider that.
I mean, I was working hard at writing, and the amount of actual publication relative to that could be eager enough.
So when people praise one of my books over another, for example, Music on Clinton Street Sold, which is my first novel, in fact,
although The Butcher Boy is constantly referred to as my first novel, which it isn't.
It's only about, I'd say, 50 copies, you know, and most of them were bought by my family.
I was just about to say, your family probably had 25 of them.
Yeah, I'm not saying how many I have.
And the second book, which was called Cairn, which is now going to have been rehabilitated to some extent, which is my second novel.
Rehabilitated by whom?
By you?
No, no, it's because of the fact that it was published and the people got to know about it.
So in other words, you didn't go back and rework it or anything?
Ah, no, that's forgery.
Okay, that's good.
That's a question I would have.
Tim O'Brien, you know Tim O'Brien?
Yeah.
He's now in the process of rewriting his early novels.
I don't agree with that.
And a lot of people say, what are you doing?
That's why this is completed work.
This represents a time and a stage of development in your life.
I cannot understand that.
Well, anyway, the rehabilitative, and it says that it was published in paperback last year by Picador, and people went to it, and a lot of people liked it, but they didn't know about it the first time, so that book is as important to me as any book that was successful, and when The Butcher Boy came out, it got so much success, and just carry on, and I wanted it to almost like try something that was twice as difficult, because the character of The Butcher Boy was an engaging kind of standpoint,
Where did he come from?
Somewhere in the deep murky waters of the subconscious, I suppose.
Down in there.
And was there a musical influence?
No, very much so.
The Butcher Boy is a ballad, you see.
The Butcher Boy is a ballad about loss and longing.
About a girl who hangs herself due to disappointment and love.
And it is that haunting.
You know, if I could take the Malachy Dodging character who, because of the kind of cataclysmic event that occurs early in his life where he sees his mother in flagrant head delicto, closes his heart to her.
But his heart opens slowly towards the end.
He devotes his life to her when she's incapacitated by a stroke.
It's really about love, the book, I think.
Love and death.
Did I interrupt you?
No, go right ahead.
Pardon me if I jump on the right.
I have no book to help me here, but we're winging it.
But I'm doing all right, aren't I?
So you were born in 55, which would make you about 40, I would guess.
I just turned it.
So are you a transitional?
Are you in a state of transition?
Is this developing work?
Is this mature work?
Very much development.
Very much, yeah.
I think I'm telling the same story all the time from different angles, you know, and I don't know, I'm not quite sure myself what the story is, but I'd say maybe it's about, it's not the beginning, it's maybe coming towards the middle.
But you think that that's interesting.
I can't tell you how many authors I've interviewed over the years, Nadine Gordimer as one example, who said almost using the same precise words you just did, that it's all one story.
It's like walking into a room looking at a piece of sculpture and just moving around and looking at it from a different angle.
This book is from this angle, but it's the same piece of sculpture.
You know how prolific she has been over the years.
You're saying the same thing here.
You may not even know exactly what the whole story is.
Because that's what we're here for, you know.
That's why we're on the road, to get to that point.
And you don't know, you don't really know.
But you certainly do feel that it is a corpus.
Very much so, yeah.
I certainly hope so.
And what are you working on now for our next book?
Well, there's a song running around my head called... We've got to explore this.
That's all I can say, you know.
I mean, I'm just trying to nail it down as best I can on words.
There's a jaunty song in my head called Breakfast on Pluto, which was recorded by a one-man band in 1968 called Don Partridge.
And it's the most beautiful little lyric I've ever heard.
And somewhere at the back of my mind is a young girl of about eight years of age who's very jaunty and very witty, and she sings this song all the time.
And the song is her character, her personality, because it's jaunty, flighty, and optimistic.
Now, probably what's going to happen is some other song is going to come along and charge into this thing and destroy it.
Well, that hasn't happened yet, so I'd like to write a nice happy book, but maybe I will.
Maybe when you have kids of your own, it's easier to do that sort of thing.
Do you have any children?
I have two daughters, yeah.
I have two daughters.
How old are your daughters?
Nine and seven.
They're great.
Am I 13 and 11?
They maybe transform the world, yeah.
Uh-huh.
How about short fiction?
I've done a lot of that, actually.
I've never done journalism.
I've done a lot of short stories.
I have a collection of short stories that I haven't published yet.
Mm-hmm.
Were these previously published?
They were, yeah.
I won an award here and there for short fiction when I started off.
Are you an Irish writer in your view?
I'd like to be a writer with an Irish personality or an Irish soul or something.
I'd like to belong to the world community of writers.
But certainly my view of the world is...
uniquely Irish.
And when you write, do you have a specific reader in mind, or are you writing mainly to please or to satisfy yourself?
It's a kind of mixture of both.
I do take the reader into account all right, you know.
But the reader, is this a nebulous and a vague reader, or is there a specific reader?
I think it's someone like me, you know, someone that goes around the library, someone who looks at bookshops.
But there's no specific sex or age?
No, anyone, anyone that's interested.
Uh-huh.
But really, ultimately, it's like it is for yourself, first of all, and that you'll go mad if you don't get it down.
You'll get it down right.
Now, the butcher boy was widely praised and honored in England and everywhere else.
There is a quite extraordinary trend recently in the Booker Prize, for instance, with the Kelman's...
the recent controversy regarding him.
How do you see yourself in this whole literary world?
I mean, there's a conventional writer who writes in English.
And then these others, regional types of writers.
They're almost commonwealth writers, aren't they?
Commonwealth writers, yeah.
For a reclamation of the language, yeah.
Yeah, and I did an interview with Kelman, and of course he's quite adamant on being, on writing in his dialect, and writing
a Scottish kind of a representing Scottish literature I wonder you know are there any parallels with you here well I certainly don't see myself as flying the flag like for the working classes or anything else but like what really what really dictates the book for me whether it's going to be written in colloquial dialect or whether it's going to be written in a kind of paired omniscient narrative voice is the character in the mood of the book that will dictate it you know and if that that goes against what my previous views on the thing where well I'm going to I'm going to let it be character autonomous and go with it you know
Because it's the music of the book that will dictate it for me.
Let's explore the music.
Are you a musician?
I used to be.
Well, I wasn't any good, though.
Maybe I'm a failed musician.
Maybe that's what it is.
And when you say musician, are you a vocalist?
Well, I used to play the piano and write songs, and I played with a country and western band for a while.
Really?
Popular in Ireland?
Country music is hugely popular in Ireland.
American country music?
I played and the kind of Irish...
version or breed of it.
I played all over the country.
But mainly I was a piano player, I suppose, who used to write songs.
I was never any good.
I mean, I didn't have a good voice or a bit of a bad ear, but I wasn't a bad lyricist, I suppose, but I never did anything much with it.
And maybe that's what it's all about, you know.
I really wanted to be up there in front of 10,000 people.
Well, given your brothers, would you rather be a successful musician or a successful writer?
I'd rather be a successful... I'd rather be a good writer.
Good, I guess, is the more correct word.
Is this an aspect of maturation or just a realization that you couldn't be a good musician in your view?
No, I think it won't, you know, won't.
Because I could have been a contender, Charlie.
I could have been a musician.
you know I mean I wasn't thrown out of the band or anything it's just that I was burning the candle at both ends and just touring and all the rest of it and you just couldn't do any writing so I was one or the other and I decided to and when you give your talks do you read basically whatever you talk I don't talk I'm not a good commentator on anything do you pick do you pick excerpts at random or do you have no I have maybe about a dozen in each book that I juggle around and how do you find the response to your work here in the United States it's unbelievable
The audiences are magnificent.
And do you think, contrary to what a lot of people say, that there aren't serious readers, or that a serious reader is in danger of becoming extinct, or do you disagree with that?
All the evidence is to the contrary, and I've been everywhere that's possible to be the last couple of weeks.
If anything, it seems to me that the written word and the spoken word
but the audio temperature, general conversation, is fighting back.
That's the way I see it.
Huge bookshops, the cafes, you know.
And how do you play in university towns?
I did Berkeley.
Good.
You know, see, my column is carried in a lot of university towns.
I'm out in Eugene, Oregon, for instance, and Knoxville, Tennessee, and Gainesville, Florida.
You've got Charlottesville, so these are all big university towns.
Well, Berkeley was fabulous.
I had a great night out there.
They invited me out.
There was maybe 70 or 80 people there.
Do you enjoy a good time?
I have a good time.
America is the place because you get both.
You get the reader, you get the talker, you get the open heart, and you get plenty of fun.
That's the one.
Do you mind if we wrap it up pretty quick?
It's fine.
I've got plenty of stuff.
Would you inscribe a couple?
I've never been to L.A.
You know the tattered cover?
Yes, yes.
You talk about the word and being alive, that's a huge place.
Run by a woman who's an independent, right, who was threatened numerous times over the Salman Rushdie book, and she refused adamantly to take it off the shelf, you know?
That takes a little bit of testosterone, doesn't it?
It certainly does.
It sure does.
To be lonesome leaving America, I always get this feeling going back.
Do you?
Oh, yeah.
How often do you come over?
Ah, you see, I don't know that one at all.
So, would you say you basically twiddled in obscurity prior to The Butcher Boy?
Oh, absolutely.
And what was it about that book that connected with readers, in your view?
Their heart goes out to them in some peculiar way.
Because the woman he murders did nothing wrong, and yet everybody's rooting for him to kill her.
How did you manage to pull that off?
I didn't try.
I didn't try to do it.
I don't know what happened there.
I thought the feminists would destroy me.
Feminists loved us.
I don't know what it says about that.
Why is that?
Because she's such a bitch.
She wasn't really such a bitch.
I mean, she wasn't the most human person in the world, but she certainly didn't deserve to be plastered all over the kitchen wall.
Now, what is this?
This story, again, comes from a ballad, right?
Yeah.
Is there a moral?
Do we learn something?
How are we enriched by this story?
Or is that important?
Is that not important?
I like people who tell me that.
for them to investigate where they like it.
I mean, I have a lot of views on it, but it's such, people come at it with such individual kind of feelings that everyone seems to like it for various different reasons.
Another aspect of it that came out, too, I asked a girl in Australia what she liked about it, and she said, I always wanted to win a million, billion, trillion dollars, she said.
And I know that puddle.
There's the other puddle in the book, I don't know if you read the book, but there's this puddle in the book where the kids...
hack at the ice.
And everyone has done that, you know?
The blue sky over everything, talking about winning the lottery.
But essentially, I suppose, it's Huckleberry Finn kind of energy.
It's like a stand-up comic taking on the world, and he's the classic underdog.
You're having fun with it?
Ah, yeah.
I have a ball of the readings.
So it's sort of a fancy Brady.
He's a character in a fan club developing cult now, you know?
And they turn up with all the readings.
And they're at the front row with the book and they're going with it.
Do you have your legions of devoted collectors yet?
No, I don't have any of that yet.
Well, I would imagine those first couple books of yours are very collectible now and very... They're publishing... I wouldn't let the first one go because it's not good enough, but they're publishing the second one here next year, which is nice.
It's nice to bring them in from the phone.
So you think the stories will come next or a novel?
No, it'll be another novel.
And that's in progress or still in germination right now?
It's sort of in progress, even if you're thinking about it, isn't it?
Uh-huh.
There's a wonderful old New Yorker cartoon that shows a guy lying down in a hammock.
Is that it working?
He says, listen, a writer is always working.
How does it go?
A writer is always writing, but he's writing.
Um...
Hello!
Thanks.
Can I take some shower?
Yeah.
Is it?
Hi.
Bye, Mama.
One day.
I'm going for one.
Oh, no.
Never missed the one.
I was.
Well then, you never wanted to have the family.
I needed a house.
Kelly, have you ever been inside the person in Vermont?
Would you keep in touch?
Did I die?
You didn't give me a chance.
Should've tried.
Are we still together at 10 years?
Yes, we're still together.
Yeah, make sure.
What about the years?
Out of bed, yeah.
I'm not dead.
What about your mom?
It's going to be alive, okay.
Why can't I just get out of here?
Why can't I just run away?
Matt, I don't want to go.
Get back to it.
I'm pregnant.
Cool.
Nice.
That's right, Buddha!
What are you, Mr. Stanley, Buddha?
Up here.
How did you miss him?
You know what's coming?
It was a T.E.C.
car.
Son of a bitch says that I had died.
So learn tonight.
You don't kill him, you don't go back.
What?
I think it's time clock.
Time clock.
Do you want to hold it back?
Careful.
What do you want to do here?
Do you want to get a butter?
Up there.
Okay.
Yeah, yeah.
What are you having?
... ...
Thank you.
All right.
I find it reassuring to know if the future holds so much.
Not only will it turn this down to do that, it will also separate every part of you from every other part of the circle.
Because I don't want to know.
The Agent Walker is too miserable.
But Officer Walker is dead.
He's just not a disease statistic.
When he's gone, he'll come.
If the younger one wants him to see this, he's dead.
No, he's not dead tomorrow.
If he was dead, he would not be here.
OK?
I don't know.
Oh, no!
Hey, Mo!
I'm out of here.
Hey, Mo, what's the way out of here?
I want to do what's pretty incredible.
They just keep taking my time.
God, I'm sad, huh?
Seven years, my business would never come short.
And one day, myself put my seven years for ten dollars.
Are we going to do a shoot?
There's a bomb that's going to go off in a second now.
You know what happens then?
Well, I'm going to be dead.
And I'm going to win my fault.
My young self is super aggressive, and you can't save your wife.
Just like you could've been once before.
She died because she died.
She made some changes.
So now you're going to fuck with her.
You're going to try to stay.
Wrong.
I'm staying right.
You know, usually I take those more than once.
But in this case, I don't see any other options.
I do.
What are you doing?
What do you mean when you call me?
You left a message when I sent it out for you.
Then leave a message, I'm talking to you again.
And I'll be on myself.
No, no, I didn't feel it for you.
It's a real mess, huh?
Don't you have to do the real mess?
It turns out to be a quick ordinary word in the bloodbath.
You can't deny your comfort of the devil.
Bye.
We have been waiting for this.
What do you want to do now?
Hey, where are you going?
What happened to you?
What are you talking about?
Who are you talking about?
Yeah, because I just don't know about you.
It's just right here, that's all.
Hey, what's going on?
That's my call.
It's my call.
Look, if you want time off.
10 years ago, we called up in Albany, and 12th morning, disappeared, somebody's ever seen it.
I don't know.
This time still is strong.
Do you like that?
I guess not.
Hey, what do you want?
I'm still waiting for a chance.
Thank you.
.